6.824 2012 Lecture 13: Paxos

From Paxos Made Simple, by Leslie Lamport, 2001

introduction
  overall topic: fault-tolerant replicated services
  saw replicated state machine last time, primary/backup
  today: robust agreement on primary
  Lab 6!

replicated state machine via primary/backup
  [many clients, primary, backup, state, operations]
  if all servers see same sequence of ops
    they will remain replicas, so one can take over from another
  works for deterministic local services: lock, block storage, files
  how to ensure all replicas see same sequence of ops?
    clients send all operations to current primary
    primary chooses order, sends to backups, replies to client
  if primary fails, clients switch to backup

broken plan for primary failure:
 how about:
   backup pings primary
   takes over if gets no response from primary
 doesn't work:
   pings lost => two primaries
   pings delayed => two primaries
   partition => two primaries

basic problem:
  backup can't distinguish broken network from dead primary
    but it should act differently in the two cases!
  seems like an impossible problem -- but it's not

the basic idea behind Paxos
  three or more servers
  there can be at most one network partition with a majority of servers
  only the majority partition (if any) can have primary

Paxos is a fault-tolerant agreement protocol
 general-purpose algorithm
 one or more servers each propose a value
 correctness:
   if agreement reached, all agreeing nodes see same value
 fault-tolerance:
   only a majority is required
   == can tolerate non-reachability of a minority of servers

what shall we use Paxos to agree on?
  for a primary/backup replicated state machine system
  we want to agree on who is the primary, and who are the backups
  let's just agree on the set of live servers
    and always have the primary be the live server with lowest ID

config service provides "views" and "view change"
 system goes through a sequence of views
 view: view# and set of participants
 Paxos ensures agreement on unique successor of each view
 example:
   0, S1, S2, S3
   1, S2, S3
   2, S2, S3, S4
   3, S1, S2, S3, S4
 two uses:
   current view implies current primary
   previous view tells new primary who to get state from

what does config service need from Paxos?
 one or more nodes will see change in set of pingable nodes
 call Paxos("i+1 S1 S2")
   maybe just one such call, maybe more than one
   all same i+1
   maybe all same srv list, maybe different
 eventually Paxos says "decided i+1 S1 S2"

config srv creates separate Paxos instance for each view change
  so from now on in lecture, agreeing on just a single new view

general Paxos approach
 one (or more) nodes decide to be the proposer
 proposer contacts participants, tries to assemble a majority
 if a majority respond, we're done

Paxos has two phases
 proposer can't just send "do you promise to commit to this value?"
   can't promise: maybe everyone else just promised to a different value
   have to be able to change mind
 so: prepare, and accept

exchange:
 proposer        acceptors
     prepare(n) ->
  <- prepare_ok(n_a, v_a)
     accept(n, v') ->
  <- accept_ok(n)
     decided(v') ->

why n?
 to distinguish among multiple rounds, e.g. proposer crashes, simul props
 want later rounds to supersede earlier ones
 numbers allow us to compare early/late
 n values must be unique, comparable, and roughly follow time
 n = <time, server ID>

definition: server S accepts n/v
  it responded accept_ok to accept(n, v)

definition: n/v is chosen
  a majority of servers accepted n/v

the crucial property:
 if a value was chosen, any subsequent choice must be the same value
   i.e. protocol must not change its mind
   maybe a different proposer &c, but same value!
   this allows us to freely start new rounds after crashes &c
 tricky b/c "chosen" is system-wide property
   e.g. majority accepts, then proposer crashes
   nodes cannot tell locally

so:
 proposer doesn't send out value with prepare
 acceptors send back any value they have already accepted
 if there is one, proposer proposes that value
   to avoid changing an existing choice
 if no value already accepted,
   proposer can propose any value (e.g. a client request)
 proposer must get prepare_ok from majority
   to guarantee intersection with majority formed by existing choice

now the protocols

state:
 must persist across reboots
 n_p (highest prepare seen)
 n_a, v_a (highest accept seen)

proposer(v):
 choose n, unique and higher than any n seen so far
 send prepare(n) to all servers including self
 if prepare_ok(n_a, v_a) from majority:
   v' = v_a with highest n_a; choose own v otherwise
   send accept(n, v') to all
   if accept_ok(n) from majority:
     send decided(v') to all

acceptor's prepare(n) handler:
 if n > n_p
   n_p = n
   reply prepare_ok(n_a, v_a)

acceptor's accept(n, v) handler:
 if n >= n_p
   n_a = n
   v_a = v
   reply accept_ok(n)

if acceptor times out (i.e. doesn't see decide())
  become a proposer

example 1 (normal operation):
  server set is S1, S2, S3
  S3 just crashed
  S1's pings would see S3 is now dead
  S1's config server asks Paxos to agree on vid+1, S1, S2
  S1 is proposer
S1: p1    a1v1    d1
S2: p1    a1v1    d1
S3: (p1)  (a1v1)  (d1)

Note Paxos only requires a majority of the servers
  so we can continue even though S3 was down
  proposer must not wait for S3's responses! fast timeout.

What would happen if network partition?
  I.e. S3 was alive?
  S3 would also initiate Paxos for new view
  S3's prepare would not assemble a majority

Paxos must assemble a majority
  But a majority of what?
  If there are seven servers, and S1 thinks S4 S5 S6 S7 are down,
    can it proceed with a majority among just S1 S2 S3?

the homework question:
 How does Paxos ensure that the following sequence of events can't
 happen? What actually happens, and which value is ultimately chosen?
 A: p1 a1foo
 B: p1       p2 a2bar
 C: p1 a1foo p2 a2bar
 C's prepare_ok to B really included "foo"
   thus a2foo, and so no problem
 the point: if the system has already reached agreement
   subsequent proposer will re-use agree value, learned during propose phase

example 2 (concurrent proposers):
scenario:
A1 starts proposing n=10
A1 sends out just one accept v=10
A3 starts proposing n=11
  but A1 does not receive its proposal
  A3 only has to wait for a majority of proposal responses
A1: p10 a10v10 
A2: p10        p11
A3: p10        p11  a11v11
A1 and A3 have accepted different values!
what will happen?
  what will A2 do if it gets a10v10 accept msg from A1?
  what will A1 do if it gets a11v11 accept msg from A3?
what if A3 were to crash at this point (and not restart)?

how about this:
A1: p10  a10v10               p12
A2: p10          p11  a11v11  
A3: p10          p11          p12   a12v10
has the system agreed to a value at this point?

what's the commit point?
  i.e. exactly when has agreement been reached?
  i.e. at what point would changing the value be a disaster?
  after a majority has the same v_a? no -- why not?
  after a majority has the same v_a/n_a? yes -- why sufficient?

what if new proposer chooses n < old proposer?
 i.e. if clocks are not synced
 cannot make progress, though no correctness problem

what if an acceptor crashes after receiving accept?
A1: p1  a1v1
A2: p1  a1v1 reboot  p2  a2v?
A3: p1               p2  a2v?
A2 must remember v_a/n_a across reboot! on disk
  might be only intersection with new proposer's majority
  and thus only evidence that already agreed on v1

what if an acceptor reboots after sending prepare_ok?
 does it have to remember n_p on disk?
 if n_p not remembered, this could happen:
 S1: p10            a10v10
 S2: p10 p11 reboot a10v10 a11v11
 S3:     p11               a11v11
 11's proposer did not see value 10, so 11 proposed its own value
 but just before that, 10 had been chosen!
 b/c S2 did not remember to ignore a10v10

can Paxos get stuck?
  yes, if there is not a majority that can communicate
  how about if a majority is available?

That was Lab 6; now for Lab 7.

Remember:
  replicated lock server
  primary and a few backups
  all servers execute all operations in the same order
  layers:
    lock_server
    RSM
    config
    Paxos
  paxos ensures agreement on squence of views
    <vid 0, S1 S2 S3>
    <vid 1, S2 S3>
    <vid 2, S1 S2>
    ...

How do new views get triggered?
  all nodes ping each other
  if pingable nodes != view's live nodes
    start new Paxos instance for vid+1
  if node reboots
    start new Paxos instance

RSM assigns sequence number to client requests
  e.g. acquire, release
  called "viewstamp" = vid:seq
  0:0, 0:1, 0:2, 1:0, 1:1, 2:0
  all replicas execute client requests in viewstamp order
    can't execute 0:2 until executed 0:1

how to continue after a view change?
  if primary from prev view still running, use its state
  if a backup from prev view still running, use its state
  if no server from prev view still running
    must wait for one to re-join!
    even if Paxos reached agreement

if primary crashes, will all backups have the same state?
  no: maybe some backups saw last operation, and some did not
  if state is small, pick one backup and send its state to all
  if state is large
    find last operation, send to backups that missed it

what if backup B1 was the only one to see the last operation
  and B1 is down/separated for a while
  and then B1 re-joins
  problem: B1 executed an operation that no-one else saw
  if state is small, replace B1's state
  if state is large
    need a way to abort the last operation
    read the Harp paper

summary
 overall goal: replicated state machines
 needs a single sequence of views
   e.g. sequence of primaries
 paxos chooses each new view; one paxos instance per view
 servers must
