6.824 2012 Lecture 14: Harp

Replication in the Harp File System
Liskov, Ghemawat, Gruber, Johnson, Shrira, Williams
SOSP 1991

Why are we reading this paper?
  Complete case study of primary/backup
  Uses Paxos-like agreement for view change
  Covers reconstruction of state after primary crash
  Covers optimizations for performance
  Covers modifications to make real service fit state machine framework
  Interesting handling of simultaneous power failures

Harp was the first complete primary/backup system that dealt w/ partition
  It included an agreement system like Paxos, but not Paxos
  It's not clear which came first

Fault-tolerant
  2b+1 servers
  Can operate if b+1 are in good shape -- i.e. tolerate b failures

Sophisticated recovery from many failure types
  Up but not reachable / partitioned
  Power failure, including simultaneous
  Reboot, no RAM, preserved disk
  Reboot, lost disk
  *** not enough to have majority -- must recover latest data too!

Basic operation
  Client, primary, backup(s), witness(es).
  Client -> Primary
  Primary -> Backups
  Backups -> Primary, primary waits for all backups
  Primary -> reply to Client
  Primary -> tell Backups to Commit

Design centered around log of operations
  What is in a typical log record?

Why does Harp have so many log pointers?
  FP most recent client request
  CP commit point (real in primary, latest heard in backup)
  AP highest record sent to disk on this node
  LB disk has completed up to here
  GLB all nodes have completed disk up to here?

Why the FP-CP gap?
  So primary doesn't need to wait for ACKs from each backup
    before sending next operation to backups
  Higher throughput: can overlap wait for prev op with exec of next
  When might overlap be possible?

Why the CP-AP gap?
  Why not execute operation at CP?
  What happens at CP?
  How can you generate a reply before executing the operation?
  What if some prev op in AP/CP gap affects result?
  What happens at AP?

Why the AP-LB gap?
  Allows delay between issue of op and when it must complete to disk
  Why is this useful?

What is the LB? How does Harp find out what the current LB is?

Why the LB-GLB gap?
  I.e. why not delete log record when disk write completes locally?
  Specific scenario when LB-GLB records are needed?

How does failure recovery work?

Scenarios
  5 servers, 1-5, 1 is usually primary, 2-3 backups, 4-5 witnesses

S2's cooling fan fails, so its cpu melts, and it crashes
  new view
    S4+S5 are promoted (witness -> backup)
    S4+S5 get log starting at GLB (i.e. all ops not known to be on disks)
    S4+S5 start logging all operations to tape, but don't apply them
    GLB advances, so primary discards log entries
  why bother promoting S4?
  why do we need to promote S4 AND S5?
    after all, only one backup failed
  S2 gets a new CPU and reboots
  new view
  S4 sends big log to S2, S2 plays it to get all missing operations
  What's the earliest operation S2's disk might have missed?

S2 suffers a disk failure, then repaired w/ new empty disk
  S2 needs to get complete disk image + log from S1 or S3

What if S1 crashes just after replying to a client?
  S2 declared new primary
  Where will S2's FP and CP be after view change?
  Will S3's disk+log naturally == S2's disk+log?
  Does S2 have to do anything special about ops between CP and FP?

After S1 recovers
  Can we use its on-disk FS after replaying witness log?
  Could S1 have executed an op just before crashing
    that the replicas didn't execute after taking over?

Why does Harp use a log?
  1. keep track of concurrent ops, for performance
  2. holds tentative operations before all backups reply
  3. help replicas ensure they are identical after primary crashes
  4. bring separated server's disk up to date via replay

All nodes suffer power failure just after S1 replies to a client.
  Then they all re-start.
  Can they continue?
  Where were the logs stored while the power was out?
  What if they had all lost RAM content -- could they continue?
  How do they tell the difference?

Could Harp have been designed w/o UPS?
  What would the price be?

S2 and S3 are partitioned (but still alive)
  Can S1+S4+S5 continue to process operations?
  S4 moves to S2/S3 partition
  Can S2+S3+S4 continue?

S2 and S3 are partitioned (but still alive)
  S4 crashes, loses memory contents, reboots in S2/S3 partition
  Can they continue?
  Depends on what S4's on-disk view # says.

Everybody suffers a power failure.
  S4 disk and memory are lost, but it does re-start after repair.
  S1 and S5 never recover.
  S2 and S3 save everything on disk, re-start just fine.
  Can S2+S3+S4 continue?
  (harder than it looks)

In general, how do you know you can form a view?
  They use a Paxos-like scheme, but that's not enough.
  1. No other view possible.
  2. Know view # of most recent view.
  3. Know all ops from most recent view.
  #1 is true if you have n+1 nodes in new view.
  #2 is true if you have n+1 nodes that did not lose view # since last view.
    View # stored on disk, so they just have to know disk is OK.
    One of them *must* have been in the previous view.
    So just take the highest view number.
  And #3?
    Need a disk image, and a log, that together reflect all operations 
      through the end of the previous view.
    Perhaps from different servers, e.g. log from promoted witness,
      disk from backup that failed multiple views ago.

If a node recovers w/ working disk, can you really replay a log into it?
  What if log contains operations already applied to the disk?

If a server crashes (no UPS), can it recover on-disk FS by replaying a log?
  (A log from some other node.)
  Would it be OK to recover FS on disk using fsck?

If a node recovers w/o disk contents, i.e. w/ empty disk
  Does it work to copy another server's disk?
  What if the other server is actively serving Harp/NFS ops?
  Can we avoid pausing for the entire time of disk copy?

How does Harp handle read-only operations?
  e.g. GETATTR?
  Why doesn't it have to consult the backups?
  Why is it correct to ignore ops between CP and FP when generating the reply?
    I.e. Section 4 says executes at CP
    What if client sends WRITE then READ before WRITE reaches CP?

What if a primary is partitioned, other servers have view change.
  Will old primary still perform operations for clients?

Does Harp have performance benefits?
  In Fig 5-1, why isn't Harp *slower* than non-replicated server?
  How much win would we expect by substituting RPC for disk operations?

Why graph x=load y=response-time?
  Why does this graph make sense?
  Why not just graph total time to perform X operations?
  One reason is that systems sometimes get more/less efficient w/ high load.
  And we care a lot how they perform w/ overload.

Why does response time go up with load?
  Why first gradual...
    Queuing and random bursts?
    And some ops more expensive than others, cause temp delays.
  Then almost straight up?
    Probably has hard limits, like disk I/Os per second.
    Queue length diverges once offered load > capacity
