6.824 2012 Lecture 11: two-phase commmit

Topic: fault-tolerance for distributed systems
  Yesterday: crash recovery for single system
  Today: crash recovery for distributed system

Crash recovery:
  A bunch of computers are cooperating on some task
  Some crash, or network fails
  You don't want to leave state in some unknown partial state
  Can you back out before repair?
  Can you complete after repair?

Strategy: 
  Generalize transactions to have sub-parts on different computers
  Then make atomic distributed transactions

Example:
  calendar system
  want to schedule meetings with multiple participants
  one server hold calendars of users A-M, another server holds N-Z
  [diagram: two servers]
  sched(u1, u2, t):
    begin_transaction
      if reserve(u1, t) and reserve(u2, t):
        print "yes"
      else
        print "no"
    end_transaction
  the reserve() calls are RPCs to the two calendar servers
  either might say yes, no, or fail
  We want both to reserve, or both not to reserve.
  We don't want only one to reserve
  Need an "Atomic Commit Protocol"

Idea: only tentative changes at participating servers
  so they can later decide to commit or abort
  reserve_handler(u, t):
    lock u[t]
    if u[t] is free:
      u[t] = taken -- IN TEMPORARY STORAGE
      return 1 -- WITHOUT RELEASING LOCK
    return 0
  commit_handler():
    copy temporary u[t] to real u[t]
    unlock u[t]
  abort_handler():
    discard temporary u[t]
    unlock u[t]

Idea: some single entity decides whether to commit
  let's call it the Transaction Coordinator (TC)
  four entities: client, TC, server A, server B
  [time diagram]
  client sends RPCs to A, B
  on end_transaction, client sends "go" to TC
  TC/A/B execute some protocol...
  TC reports "commit" or "abort" to client

We want two properties:
  TC, A, and B each have a notion of committing
  Correctness:
    if any commit, none abort
    if any abort, none commit
  Performance:
    if no failures, and A and B can commit, then commit.
    if failures, come to some conclusion ASAP.

Let's do correctness first.

Correct atomic commit protocol:
  [time diagram: client, TC, A, B]
  client sends "go" to TC
  TC sends "prepare" messages to A and B.
  A and B respond, saying whether they're willing to commit.
  If both say "yes", TC sends "commit" messages.
  If either says "no", TC sends "abort" messages.
  A/B "decide to commit" if they get a commit message.
    I.e. they actually modify the user's calendar.

Why is this correct?
  Neither can commit unless they both agreed.

What about performance?
  Crashes or message losses can still prevent completion.
  Bad b/c A/B hold locks until commit/abort decided.
  
We have two types of problems:
  Timeout. I'm up, but I don't recv a msg I expect.
    Maybe the other host crashed. Maybe the network is broken.
    We cannot usually tell the difference, so must be correct in either case.
  Reboot. I crashed, and I'm rebooting, and I need to clean up.
    
Let's deal with timeout first.
  Where do hosts wait for messages?
  1) TC waits for yes/no.
  2) A and B wait for commit/abort.

Termination protocol summary:
  TC t/o for yes/no -> abort
  B t/o from TC, B voted no -> abort
  B t/o from TC, B voted yes
    B asks A for status
    A says commit -> commit
    A says abort -> abort
    A says no -> abort
    otherwise -> wait for TC

Handling TC timeout waiting for yes/no.
  TC has not sent any "commit" messages.
  So TC can safely abort, and send "abort" messages.
  We've preserved correctness, but sacrificed performance.
  Because (maybe) A and B were both prepared to commit,
    but network delayed one of the messages,
    we could have committed, but TC didn't know it.
  TC is being conservative.

Handling A/B timeout while waiting for commit/abort.
  Let's talk about just B (A is symmetric).
  If B voted "no", it can unilaterally abort.
  So what if B voted "yes"?
  Can B unilaterally decide to abort?
    No! TC might have gotten "yes" from both,
    and sent out "commit" to A, but crashed before sending to B.
    So then A would commit and B would abort: incorrect.
  B can't unilaterally commit, either:
    A might have voted "no".

B could just wait forever until it gets commit/abort from TC.
  But you can do better than that:

Termination protocol for B if it voted "yes":
  B sends "status" request message to A.
    Asks if A heard "commit" or "abort" from TC
  If B doesn't hear reply from A: no decision, wait for TC.
  If A received "commit" or "abort" from TC: B decides the same way.
    Can't disagree with TC...
  If A voted "no": B and A both abort.
    TC can't have decided "commit".
  If A voted "yes": no decision possible!
    TC might have decided "commit" and replied to client.
    Or TC might have timed out and aborted.
    A and B must wait for the TC.

What have we achieved?
  Can resolve some timeout situations w/ guaranteed correctness.
  But sometimes A and B must block.
  Due to TC failure, or failure of TC's network connection.

What are the challenges for crash/reboot?
  Would like to restart and continue, perhaps w/ termination protocol
  If A/B sent "yes" before crash, must remember!
    Can't change to "no" (and thus abort) after restart
    Since TC may have seen previous yes and told A to commit
  If TC sent "commit" or "abort" before crash, must remember!
    Can't change mind since A/B/client have already acted.

How to remember state across crash?
  TC/A/B have disk (or other non-volatile storage).
  Before sending yes/no/commit/abort, write decision to disk.
  A/B must also remember overall state of transaction
    Temporary copies of modified data (e.g. u[t])
    Which data are locked

Crash recovery protocol:
  If you're the TC, and there's no "commit" on disk, abort.
    Because no commit on disk -> you didn't send any "commit" messages.
  If you're A/B, and no "yes" on disk, abort.
    No "yes" on disk -> didn't vote yes -> nobody could have committed.
  If you're A/B, and there is a "yes" on your disk:
    Ordinary termination protocol, might block.
  If everyone has rebooted and is reachable, you can decide.
    Ask TC if it has "commit" on its disk.

This protocol is called "two-phase commit".
  What properties does it have?
  1. All hosts that decide reach the same decision.
  2. No commit unless everyone says "yes".
  3. No failures and all "yes", then commit.
  4. If failures, then repair, will reach a decision.
  5. TC failure can make servers block w/ locks held until repair.

2PC perspective
  Useful within a single smallish distributed system
  Bad that TC crash can cause indefinite blocking
  Bad that locks can't be released until very end (even if no crash)
  Rarely used on a large scale
    E.g. not between banks, not between airlines
    Nobody wants to give up control: can't release locks
    Usually separate commit, reconcile later if someone else aborted

Case study: Argus

Argus's big ideas:
  Language support for distributed programs
    Very cool: language abstracts away ugly parts of distrib systems
  Easy persistence:
    Language objects are persistent, programmer need not use DB
    Automatic crash recovery of language objects
  Easy concurrency:
    Implicit locking of language objects
  Easy RPC model:
    RPCs are transactions w/ two-phase commit
    Programmer need not worry about RPC failure: abort undoes RPC

Picture
  "guardian" is like an RPC server
  "handler" is an RPC handler
  "action" is a distributed atomic transaction
  top-level action on A
    RPC to B
      B sends RPC to C
    RPC to D
  top-level commit
    prepare msgs to B, C, D
    commit msgs to B, C, D

Benefits best seen by studying mail example
  page 398: walk through send mail to many users example

what if one user doesn't exist?
  but mail has already been delivered to some other users
  how to un-do?

why do nested transactions make sense?
  are they just a feature? or necessary?
  does xactions + RPC => nested transactions?
  required by modularity? 
    you don't know who is calling, but you want to be atomic
  required in case RPC fails but larger xaction wants to proceed?

what happens when a guardian that did sub-action receives final commit?

what if that guardian crashes before it gets final commit/abort decision?

what happens if a guardian crashes while it is committing?
  has finalized some of the action's updates, not others

what happens if an RPC times out -- no reply?
  maybe target got the RPC
  is there ambiguity about whether it executed?

what if user reads mail during send-to-many transaction?
  how does user not see tentative new mail?
  does reading user block? where?

read_mail also deletes it
  what if new mail arrives just before msg_list$trim()?
  will it be deleted but not returned?
  why not? what lock protects? where is the lock acquired? released?

what if a user is on the list twice?
  locks are held until end of top-level xaction
  deadlock?

how do locks work?
  is there a separate lock server?

is implicit locking the right thing?
  very convenient!
  don't have to worry about forgetting to lock!
  does it ever lock too much? too long?
    easy to get deadlock
    all locks held to final commit
  does it ever not lock something you'd like to lock?
  hard case:
    if user not in table
      add user to table
    lock on whole table is correct but low concurrency
    lock per entry is not really correct (no entry to lock!)

performance?
  could the email example handle a high load?

is it good to build locks/rpc/2PC/persistence/recovery into language?
